Add section about the design of CPython's garbage collector (#562)
python/devguide: garbage_collector.rst

.. _gc:

Design of CPython's Garbage Collector
=====================================

.. highlight:: none

Abstract
--------

The main garbage collector system of CPython is reference count. The basic idea is
that CPython counts how many different places there are that have a reference to an
object. Such a place could be another object, or a global (or static) C variable, or
a local variable in some C function. When an object’s reference count becomes zero,
the object is deallocated. If it contains references to other objects, their
reference count is decremented. Those other objects may be deallocated in turn, if
this decrement makes their reference count become zero, and so on. The reference
count field can be examined using the ``sys.getrefcount`` function (notice that the
value returned by this function is always 1 more as the function also has a reference
to the object when called):

.. code-block:: python

    >>> x = object()
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    2
    >>> y = x
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    3
    del y
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    2

> The main problem present with the reference count schema is that reference count does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main problem present with the reference count schema is that a reference count does not
```

> handle reference cycles. For instance, consider this code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handle reference cycles. For instance, consider this code:
```

to accommodate extra information **before** the normal layout:

.. code-block:: none

                  +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+ \
                  |                    *_gc_next                  | |
                  +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+ | PyGC_Head
                  |                    *_gc_prev                  | |
    object -----> +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+ /
                  |                    ob_refcnt                  | \
                  +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+ | PyObject_HEAD
                  |                    *ob_type                   | |
                  +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+ /
                  |                      ...                      |
                  

In this way the object can be treated as a normal python object and when the extra
information associated to the GC is needed the previous fields can be accessed by a
simple type cast from the original object: :code:`((PyGC_Head *)(the_object)-1)`.

As is explained later in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section,

> these two extra fields are normally used to keep a double linked list of all the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these two extra fields are normally used to keep a doubly linked lists of all the
```

> these two extra fields are normally used to keep a double linked list of all the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these two extra fields are normally used to keep a doubly linked list of all the
```

objects tracked by the garbage collector (these lists are the GC generations, more on

> that in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section) but they are also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section), but they are also
```

reused to fullfill other pourposes when the full double linked list structure is not
needed as a memory optimization.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Doubly linked lists are used because they efficiently support most frequently required operations.  In
general, the collection of all objects tracked by GC are partitioned into disjoint sets, each in its own
doubly linked list.  Between collections, objects are partitioned into "generations", reflecting how
often they're survived collection attempts.  During collections, the generations(s) being collected
are further partitioned into, e.g., sets of reachable and unreachable objects.  Doubly linked lists
support moving an object from one partition to another, adding a new object,  removing an object
entirely (objects tracked by GC are most often reclaimed by the refcounting system when GC
isn't running at all!), and merging partitions, all with a small constant number of pointer updates.

> Specific APIs are offered to allocate, deallocate, initialize, track and untrack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specific APIs are offered to allocate, deallocate, initialize, track, and untrack
```

objects with GC support. These APIs can be found in the `Garbage Collector C API
documentation <https://docs.python.org/3.8/c-api/gcsupport.html>`_.

> Appart from this object structure, the type object of objects supporting garbage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apart from this object structure, the type object for objects supporting garbage
```

collection must include the ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_GC`` in its ``tp_flags`` slot and
provide an implementation of the ``tp_traverse`` handler. Unless it can be proven
that the objects cannot form reference cycles with only objects of its type or if the

> type are mutable, a ``tp_clear`` implementation must also be provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type is immutable, a ``tp_clear`` implementation must also be provided.
```

Identifiying reference cycles reference cycles
----------------------------------------------

> The algorithm that why CPython uses to detect those reference cycles is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The algorithm that CPython uses to detect those reference cycles is
```

implemented in the ``gc`` module. The garbage collector **only focuses**
on cleaning container objects (i.e. objects that can contain a reference
to one or more objects). These can be arrays, dictionaries, lists, custom
class instances, classes in extension modules, etc. One could think that
cycles are uncommon but the truth is that many internal references needed by
the interpreter create cycles everywhere. Some notable examples:

    * Exceptions contain traceback objects that contain a list of frames that
      contain the exception itself.

>     * Instances have references to their class and the class to the module, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Instances have references to their class which itself references its module, and the module
```

      contains references to everything that is inside (and maybe other modules)
      and this can lead back to the original instance.

>     * When representing data structures like graphs is very typical for them to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * When representing data structures like graphs, it is very typical for them to
```

      have internal links to themselves.

To correctly dispose of these objects once they become unreachable, they need to
be identified first. This is done in the `deduce_unreachable() <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/6202d856d637a9b4eb9789b4d4a1edb12d877de5/Modules/gcmodule.c#L1089>`__
function. Inside this component, two double-linked lists are maintained: one list contains
all objects to be scanned, and the other will contain all objects "tentatively" unreachable.

> To understand how the algorithm works, Let’s take the case of a circular linked list which has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand how the algorithm works, look at the case of a circular linked list which has
```

one link referenced by a variable A, and one self-referencing object which is completely

> unreachable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unreachable:
```

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import gc

    >>> class Link:
    ...    def __init__(self, next_link=None):
    ...        self.next_link = next_link

    >>> link_3 = Link()
    >>> link_2 = Link(link3)
    >>> link_1 = Link(link2)
    >>> link_3.next_link = link_1

    >>> link_4 = Link()
    >>> link_4.next_link = link_4

    >>> del link_4
    >>> gc.collect()
    2

When the GC starts, it has all the container objects it wants to scan
on the first linked list. The objective is to move all the unreachable

> objects. As generally most objects turn out to be reachable, is much more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
objects. Since most objects turn out to be reachable, it is much more
```

efficient to move the unreachable as this involves fewer pointer updates.

> Every object that supports garbage collection will have a extra reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every object that supports garbage collection will have an extra reference
```

count field initialized to the reference count (``gc_ref`` in the figures)
of that object when the algorithm starts. This is because the algorithm needs
to modify the reference count to do the computations and in this way the
interpreter will not modify the real reference count field. 

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-1-new-page.png

The GC then iterates over all containers in the first list and decrements by one the

> ``gc_ref`` field of any other object that container it is referencing.  For doing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``gc_ref`` field of any other object that container is referencing.  Doing
```

> this it makes use of the ``tp_traverse`` slot in the container class (implemented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this makes use of the ``tp_traverse`` slot in the container class (implemented
```

each container. After all the objects have been scanned, only the objects that have
references from outside the “objects to scan” list will have ``gc_ref > 0``.

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-2-new-page.png

Notice that having ``gc_refs == 0`` does not imply that the object is unreachable.
This is because another object that is reachable from the outside (``gc_refs > 0``)
can still have references to it. For instance, the ``link_2`` object in our example
ended having ``gc_refs == 0`` but is referenced still by the ``link_1`` object that
is reachable from the outside. To obtain the set of objects that are really
unreachable, the garbage collector scans again the container objects using the
``tp_traverse`` slot with a different traverse function that marks objects with
``gc_refs == 0`` as "tentatively unreachable" and then moves them to the
tentatively unreachable list. The following image depicts the state of the lists in a
moment when the GC processed the ``link 3`` and ``link 4`` objects but has not
processed ``link 1`` and ``link 2`` yet.

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-3-new-page.png

> Then the GC scans next the ``link 1`` object. Because its has ``gc_refs == 1``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then the GC scans the next ``link 1`` object. Because its has ``gc_refs == 1``
```

the gc does not do anything special because it knows it has to be reachable (and is
already in what will become the reachable list):

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-4-new-page.png

When the GC encounters an object which is reachable (``gc_refs > 0``), it traverses
its references using the ``tp_traverse`` slot to find all the objects that are

> reachable from it, marking moving them to the end of the list of reachable objects (where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reachable from it, moving them to the end of the list of reachable objects (where
```

to ``link 2`` and ``link 3`` below as they are reachable from ``link 1``.  From the
state in the previous image and after examining the objects referred to by ``link1``
the GC knows that ``link 3`` is reachable after all, so it is moved back to the
original list and its ``gc_refs`` field is set to one so if the GC visits it again, it
does not that is reachable. To avoid visiting a object twice, the GC marks all
objects that are not visited yet with and once an object is processed is unmarked so
the GC does not process it twice.

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-5-new-page.png

Notice that once a object that was marked as "tentatively unreachable" and later is
moved back to the reachable list, it will be visited again by the garbage collector
as now all the references that that objects has need to be processed as well. This
process in really a breadth first search over the object graph. Once all the objects
are scanned, the GC knows that all container objects in the tentatively unreachable
list are really unreachable and can thus be garbage collected.

Why moving unreachable objects is better
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> It sounds logical to move the unreachable objects under the premise that most object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It sounds logical to move the unreachable objects under the premise that most objects
```

are usually reachable, until you think about it: the reason it pays isn't actually
obvious.

Suppose we create objects A, B, C in that order. They appear in the young generation
in the same order. If B points to A, and C to B, and C is reachable from outside,
then the adjusted refcounts after the first step of the algorith runs will be 0, 0,
and 1 respectively because the only reachable object from the outside is C.

When the next step of the algorithm finds A, A is moved to the unreachable list. The
same for B when it's first encountered. Then C is traversed, B is moved *back* to
the reachable list. B is eventually traversed, and then A is moved back to the reachable
list.

> So instead of not moving at all, the reachable objects B and A are moved twice each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So instead of not moving at all, the reachable objects B and A are each moved twice.
```

3. Call the finalizers (``tp_finalize`` slot) and mark the objects as already
   finalized to avoid calling them twice if they resurrect of if other finalizers
   have removed the object first.
4. Deal with resurrected objects. If some objects have been resurrected the GC
   finds the new subset of objects that are still unreachable by running the cycle
   detection algorithm again and continues with them.
5. Call the ``tp_clear`` slot of every object so all internal links are broken and
   the reference counts fall to 0, triggering the destruction of all unreachable
   objects.

Optimization: generations
-------------------------

In order to limit the time each garbage collection takes, the GC is uses a popular
optimization: generations. The main idea behind this concept is the assumption that
most objects have a very short lifespan and can thus be collected shortly after their
creation. This has proven to be very close to the reality of many Python programs as
many temporary objects are created and destroyed very fast. The older an object is
the less likely is to become unreachable.

To take advantage of this fact, all container objects are segregated across

> three spaces or "generations" (CPython currently uses 3 generations). Every new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
three spaces/generations. Every new
```

object starts in the first generation (generation 0). The previous algorithm is
executed only over the objects of a particular generation and if an object
survives a collection of its generation it will be moved to the next one

> (generation 1), where it will it will be surveyed for collection less often. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(generation 1), where it will be surveyed for collection less often. If
```

the same object survives another GC round in this new generation (generation 1)
it will be moved to the last generation (generation 2) where it will be
surveyed the least often.

Generations are collected when the number of objects that they contain reach some

> predefined threshold which is unique of each generation and is lower the older the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
predefined threshold which is unique of each generation and is lower than the older
```

> generation is. These thresholds can be examined using the  ``gc.get_threshold``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generations are. These thresholds can be examined using the  ``gc.get_threshold``
```

function:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import gc
    >>> gc.get_threshold()
    (700, 10, 10)

The content of these generations can be examined using the
``gc.get_objects(generation=NUM)`` function and collections can be triggered
specifically in a generation by calling ``gc.collect(generation=NUM)``.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import gc
    >>> class MyObj:
    ...     pass
    ... 

    # Move everything to the last generation so its easier to inspect
    # the younger generations.

    >>> gc.collect()
    0

    # Create a reference cycle

    >>> x = MyObj()
    >>> x.self = x

>     # Initially the object is in the younguest generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Initially the object is in the younguest generation
```
```suggestion
    # Initially the object is in the younguest generation.
```

    >>> gc.get_objects(generation=0)
    [..., <__main__.MyObj object at 0x7fbcc12a3400>, ...]

    # After a collection of the younguest generation the object

>     # moves to the next generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # moves to the next generation.
```

    >>> gc.collect(generation=0)
    0
    >>> gc.get_objects(generation=0)
    []
    >>> gc.get_objects(generation=1)
    [..., <__main__.MyObj object at 0x7fbcc12a3400>, ...]

Collecting the oldest generation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In addition to the various configurable thresholds, the GC only trigger a full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the various configurable thresholds, the GC only triggers a full
```

> collection of the oldest if the ratio ``long_lived_pending / long_lived_total``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collection of the oldest generation if the ratio ``long_lived_pending / long_lived_total``
```

is above a given value (hardwired to 25%). The reason is that, while "non-full"
collections (i.e., collections of the young and middle generations) will always
examine roughly the same number of objects (determined by the aforementioned
thresholds) the cost of a full collection is proportional to the total
number of long-lived objects, which is virtually unbounded.  Indeed, it has
been remarked that doing a full collection every <constant number> of object
creations entails a dramatic performance degradation in workloads which consist

> in creating and storing lots of long-lived objects (e.g. building a large list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of creating and storing lots of long-lived objects (e.g. building a large list
```

of GC-tracked objects would show quadratic performance, instead of linear as
expected). Using the above ratio, instead, yields amortized linear performance
in the total number of objects (the effect of which can be summarized thusly:
"each full garbage collection is more and more costly as the number of objects
grows, but we do fewer and fewer of them").

Optimization: reusing fields to save memory
-------------------------------------------

> In order to save memory, the two linked list pointers in every object with gc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to save memory, the two linked list pointers in every object with GC
```

support are reused for several purposes. This is a common optimization known
as "fat pointers" or "tagged pointers": pointers that carry additional data,
"folded" into the pointer, meaning stored inline in the data representing the
address, taking advantage of certain properties of memory addressing. This is
possible as most architectures are certain types of data will often be aligned
to the size of the data, often a word or multiple thereof. This discrepancy
leaves a few of the least significant bits of the pointer unused, which can be
used for tags or to keep other information – most often as a bit field (each
bit a separate tag) – as long as code that uses the pointer masks out these
bits before accessing memory.  E.g., on a 32-bit architecture (for both
addresses and word size), a word is 32 bits = 4 bytes, so word-aligned

> addresses are always a multiple of 4, hence end in 00, leaving the last 2 bits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
addresses are always a multiple of 4, hence end in ``00``, leaving the last 2 bits
```

available; while on a 64-bit architecture, a word is 64 bits word = 8 bytes, so

> word-aligned addresses end in 000, leaving the last 3 bits available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
word-aligned addresses end in ``000``, leaving the last 3 bits available.
```

The CPython GC makes use of two fat pointers:

* Between collections, the ``_gc_prev``` field is used as the "previous"
  pointer to maintain the doubly linked list but the lowest two bits of are used
  to keep some flags like `PREV_MASK_COLLECTING`. During collections ``_gc_prev``
  is temporary used for storing the temporary copy of the reference count
  (``gc_refs``) , and the GC linked list becomes a singly linked list until
  ``_gc_prev`` is restored.

* The ``_gc_next`` field is used as the "next" pointer to maintain the doubly
  linked list but during its lowest bit is used to keep the
  ``NEXT_MASK_UNREACHABLE`` flag that indicates if an object is tentatively
  unreachable during the cycle detection algorithm.

Optimization: delay tracking containers
---------------------------------------

> Certain types of container cannot participate in a reference cycle, and so do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain types of containers cannot participate in a reference cycle, and so do
```

As is explained later in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section,
these two extra fields are normally used to keep doubly linked lists of all the
objects tracked by the garbage collector (these lists are the GC generations, more on
that in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section) but they are also
reused to fullfill other pourposes when the full double linked list structure is not
needed as a memory optimization.

Doubly linked lists are used because they efficiently support most frequently required operations.  In
general, the collection of all objects tracked by GC are partitioned into disjoint sets, each in its own
doubly linked list.  Between collections, objects are partitioned into "generations", reflecting how
often they're survived collection attempts.  During collections, the generations(s) being collected
are further partitioned into, e.g., sets of reachable and unreachable objects.  Doubly linked lists
support moving an object from one partition to another, adding a new object,  removing an object
entirely (objects tracked by GC are most often reclaimed by the refcounting system when GC

> isn't running at all!), and merging partitions, all with a small constant number of pointer updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
isn't running at all!), and merging partitions, all with a small constant number of pointer updates.

```

Restoring a blank line lost between paragraphs.

As is explained later in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section,
these two extra fields are normally used to keep doubly linked lists of all the
objects tracked by the garbage collector (these lists are the GC generations, more on
that in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section), but they are also
reused to fullfill other pourposes when the full double linked list structure is not
needed as a memory optimization.

Doubly linked lists are used because they efficiently support most frequently required operations.  In
general, the collection of all objects tracked by GC are partitioned into disjoint sets, each in its own
doubly linked list.  Between collections, objects are partitioned into "generations", reflecting how
often they're survived collection attempts.  During collections, the generations(s) being collected
are further partitioned into, e.g., sets of reachable and unreachable objects.  Doubly linked lists
support moving an object from one partition to another, adding a new object,  removing an object
entirely (objects tracked by GC are most often reclaimed by the refcounting system when GC

> isn't running at all!), and merging partitions, all with a small constant number of pointer updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
isn't running at all!), and merging partitions, all with a small constant number of pointer updates.
With care, they also support iterating over a partition while objects are being added to - and
removed from - it, which is frequently required while GC is running.
```

.. _gc:

Design of CPython's Garbage Collector
=====================================

.. highlight:: none

Abstract
--------

The main garbage collector system of CPython is reference count. The basic idea is
that CPython counts how many different places there are that have a reference to an
object. Such a place could be another object, or a global (or static) C variable, or
a local variable in some C function. When an object’s reference count becomes zero,
the object is deallocated. If it contains references to other objects, their
reference count is decremented. Those other objects may be deallocated in turn, if
this decrement makes their reference count become zero, and so on. The reference
count field can be examined using the ``sys.getrefcount`` function (notice that the
value returned by this function is always 1 more as the function also has a reference
to the object when called):

.. code-block:: python

    >>> x = object()
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    2
    >>> y = x
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    3
    del y
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    2

> The main problem present with the reference count schema is that reference counting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main problem with the reference count schema is that reference counting
```

are further partitioned into, e.g., sets of reachable and unreachable objects.  Doubly linked lists
support moving an object from one partition to another, adding a new object,  removing an object
entirely (objects tracked by GC are most often reclaimed by the refcounting system when GC
isn't running at all!), and merging partitions, all with a small constant number of pointer updates.
With care, they also support iterating over a partition while objects are being added to - and
removed from - it, which is frequently required while GC is running.

Specific APIs are offered to allocate, deallocate, initialize, track, and untrack
objects with GC support. These APIs can be found in the `Garbage Collector C API
documentation <https://docs.python.org/3.8/c-api/gcsupport.html>`_.

Apart from this object structure, the type object for objects supporting garbage
collection must include the ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_GC`` in its ``tp_flags`` slot and
provide an implementation of the ``tp_traverse`` handler. Unless it can be proven
that the objects cannot form reference cycles with only objects of its type or if the
type is immutable, a ``tp_clear`` implementation must also be provided.

> Identifiying reference cycles reference cycles

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Identifiying reference cycles
```

----------------------------------------------

The algorithm that CPython uses to detect those reference cycles is
implemented in the ``gc`` module. The garbage collector **only focuses**
on cleaning container objects (i.e. objects that can contain a reference
to one or more objects). These can be arrays, dictionaries, lists, custom
class instances, classes in extension modules, etc. One could think that
cycles are uncommon but the truth is that many internal references needed by
the interpreter create cycles everywhere. Some notable examples:

    * Exceptions contain traceback objects that contain a list of frames that

>       contain the exception itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      contain the exception itself.
      * Module-level functions reference the module's dict (which is needed to resolve globals),
         which in turn contains an entry for the module-level function.
```

    >>> link_4.next_link = link_4

    >>> del link_4
    >>> gc.collect()
    2

When the GC starts, it has all the container objects it wants to scan
on the first linked list. The objective is to move all the unreachable
objects. Since most objects turn out to be reachable, it is much more
efficient to move the unreachable as this involves fewer pointer updates.

Every object that supports garbage collection will have an extra reference
count field initialized to the reference count (``gc_ref`` in the figures)
of that object when the algorithm starts. This is because the algorithm needs
to modify the reference count to do the computations and in this way the
interpreter will not modify the real reference count field. 

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-1-new-page.png

The GC then iterates over all containers in the first list and decrements by one the
``gc_ref`` field of any other object that container is referencing.  Doing
this makes use of the ``tp_traverse`` slot in the container class (implemented
using the C API or inherited by a superclass) to know what objects are referenced by
each container. After all the objects have been scanned, only the objects that have

> references from outside the “objects to scan” list will have ``gc_ref > 0``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
references from outside the “objects to scan” list will have ``gc_refs > 0``.
```

processed ``link 1`` and ``link 2`` yet.

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-3-new-page.png

Then the GC scans the next ``link 1`` object. Because its has ``gc_refs == 1``
the gc does not do anything special because it knows it has to be reachable (and is
already in what will become the reachable list):

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-4-new-page.png

When the GC encounters an object which is reachable (``gc_refs > 0``), it traverses
its references using the ``tp_traverse`` slot to find all the objects that are
reachable from it, moving them to the end of the list of reachable objects (where
they started originally) and setting its ``gc_refs`` field to 1. This is what happens
to ``link 2`` and ``link 3`` below as they are reachable from ``link 1``.  From the
state in the previous image and after examining the objects referred to by ``link1``
the GC knows that ``link 3`` is reachable after all, so it is moved back to the
original list and its ``gc_refs`` field is set to one so if the GC visits it again, it
does know that is reachable. To avoid visiting a object twice, the GC marks all
objects that are not visited yet with and once an object is processed is unmarked so

> the GC does not process it twice.

Reviewer 2: I couldn't follow the sentence just above, and don't know what it's intending to say so can't suggest an improvement :wink:.

Author: Whoops! That sentence was never finished. I fixed it in 5ca46f7

.. figure:: images/python-cyclic-gc-5-new-page.png

Notice that once a object that was marked as "tentatively unreachable" and later is
moved back to the reachable list, it will be visited again by the garbage collector
as now all the references that that objects has need to be processed as well. This
process in really a breadth first search over the object graph. Once all the objects
are scanned, the GC knows that all container objects in the tentatively unreachable
list are really unreachable and can thus be garbage collected.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Pragmatically, it's important to note that no recursion is required by any of this, and neither does it in any other way require additional memory proportional to the number of objects, number of pointers, or the lengths of pointer chains.  Apart from ``O(1)`` storage for internal C needs, the objects themselves contain all the storage the GC algorithms require.

```

Why moving unreachable objects is better
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It sounds logical to move the unreachable objects under the premise that most objects
are usually reachable, until you think about it: the reason it pays isn't actually
obvious.

Suppose we create objects A, B, C in that order. They appear in the young generation
in the same order. If B points to A, and C to B, and C is reachable from outside,

> then the adjusted refcounts after the first step of the algorith runs will be 0, 0,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then the adjusted refcounts after the first step of the algorithm runs will be 0, 0,
```

would move A, B, and C once each. The key is that this dance leaves the objects in
order C, B, A - it's reversed from the original order.  On all *subsequent* scans,
none of them will move.  Since most objects aren't in cycles, this can save an
unbounded number of moves across an unbounded number of later collections. The only
time the cost can be higher is the first time the chain is scanned.

Destroying unreachable objects
------------------------------

Once the GC knows the list of unreachable objects, a very delicate process starts
with the objective of completely destroying these objects. Roughly, the process
follows these steps in order:

1. Handle and clean weak references (if any). If an object that is in the unreachable
   set is going to be destroyed and has weak references with callbacks, these
   callbacks need to be honored. This process is **very** delicate as any error can
   cause objects that will be in an inconsistent state to be resurrected or reached
   by some python functions invoked from the callbacks. To avoid this weak references
   that also are part of the unreachable set (the object and its weak reference

>    are in a cycles that are unreachable) then the weak reference needs to be clean

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   are in a cycles that are unreachable) then the weak reference needs to be cleaned
```
?

2. If an object has legacy finalizers (``tp_del`` slot) move them to the
   ``gc.garbage`` list.
3. Call the finalizers (``tp_finalize`` slot) and mark the objects as already
   finalized to avoid calling them twice if they resurrect of if other finalizers
   have removed the object first.
4. Deal with resurrected objects. If some objects have been resurrected the GC
   finds the new subset of objects that are still unreachable by running the cycle
   detection algorithm again and continues with them.
5. Call the ``tp_clear`` slot of every object so all internal links are broken and
   the reference counts fall to 0, triggering the destruction of all unreachable
   objects.

Optimization: generations
-------------------------

In order to limit the time each garbage collection takes, the GC is uses a popular
optimization: generations. The main idea behind this concept is the assumption that
most objects have a very short lifespan and can thus be collected shortly after their
creation. This has proven to be very close to the reality of many Python programs as
many temporary objects are created and destroyed very fast. The older an object is

> the less likely is to become unreachable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the less likely it is to become unreachable.
```

To take advantage of this fact, all container objects are segregated across
three spaces/generations. Every new
object starts in the first generation (generation 0). The previous algorithm is
executed only over the objects of a particular generation and if an object
survives a collection of its generation it will be moved to the next one
(generation 1), where it will be surveyed for collection less often. If
the same object survives another GC round in this new generation (generation 1)
it will be moved to the last generation (generation 2) where it will be
surveyed the least often.

Generations are collected when the number of objects that they contain reach some

> predefined threshold which is unique of each generation and is lower than the older

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
predefined threshold which is unique for each generation and is lower than the older
```

number of long-lived objects, which is virtually unbounded.  Indeed, it has
been remarked that doing a full collection every <constant number> of object
creations entails a dramatic performance degradation in workloads which consist
of creating and storing lots of long-lived objects (e.g. building a large list
of GC-tracked objects would show quadratic performance, instead of linear as
expected). Using the above ratio, instead, yields amortized linear performance
in the total number of objects (the effect of which can be summarized thusly:
"each full garbage collection is more and more costly as the number of objects
grows, but we do fewer and fewer of them").

Optimization: reusing fields to save memory
-------------------------------------------

In order to save memory, the two linked list pointers in every object with GC
support are reused for several purposes. This is a common optimization known
as "fat pointers" or "tagged pointers": pointers that carry additional data,
"folded" into the pointer, meaning stored inline in the data representing the
address, taking advantage of certain properties of memory addressing. This is

> possible as most architectures are certain types of data will often be aligned

Reviewer 3: Something is missing or extraneous here, or the order is wrong.  Is the following what you meant?
```suggestion
possible as most architectures align certain types of data
```

to the size of the data, often a word or multiple thereof. This discrepancy
leaves a few of the least significant bits of the pointer unused, which can be
used for tags or to keep other information – most often as a bit field (each
bit a separate tag) – as long as code that uses the pointer masks out these
bits before accessing memory.  E.g., on a 32-bit architecture (for both
addresses and word size), a word is 32 bits = 4 bytes, so word-aligned
addresses are always a multiple of 4, hence end in ``00``, leaving the last 2 bits
available; while on a 64-bit architecture, a word is 64 bits word = 8 bytes, so
word-aligned addresses end in ``000``, leaving the last 3 bits available.

The CPython GC makes use of two fat pointers:

* Between collections, the ``_gc_prev``` field is used as the "previous"
  pointer to maintain the doubly linked list but the lowest two bits of are used

>   to keep some flags like `PREV_MASK_COLLECTING`. During collections ``_gc_prev``

Reviewer 2: This needs some rewording.  While two bits of `_gc_prev` are used for flags, _between_ collections (which the first sentence is about), only the "object has been finalized" flag is in use.  That's the only "persistent" flag.  The two others (including `PREV_MASK_COLLECTING`) are transient, used only while GC is running.

Author: Check out the rework in 8fc0547

  is temporary used for storing the temporary copy of the reference count
  (``gc_refs``) , and the GC linked list becomes a singly linked list until
  ``_gc_prev`` is restored.

* The ``_gc_next`` field is used as the "next" pointer to maintain the doubly

>   linked list but during its lowest bit is used to keep the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  linked list but during collection its lowest bit is used to keep the
```

  ``NEXT_MASK_UNREACHABLE`` flag that indicates if an object is tentatively

>   unreachable during the cycle detection algorithm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  unreachable during the cycle detection algorithm.  This is a drawback to using only doubly linked lists to implement partitions:  while most needed operations are constant-time, there is no efficient way to determine which partition an object is currently in.  Instead, when that's needed, ad hoc tricks (like the ``NEXT_MASK_UNREACHABLE` flag) are employed.
```

support are reused for several purposes. This is a common optimization known
as "fat pointers" or "tagged pointers": pointers that carry additional data,
"folded" into the pointer, meaning stored inline in the data representing the
address, taking advantage of certain properties of memory addressing. This is
possible as most architectures align certain types of data
to the size of the data, often a word or multiple thereof. This discrepancy
leaves a few of the least significant bits of the pointer unused, which can be
used for tags or to keep other information – most often as a bit field (each
bit a separate tag) – as long as code that uses the pointer masks out these
bits before accessing memory.  E.g., on a 32-bit architecture (for both
addresses and word size), a word is 32 bits = 4 bytes, so word-aligned
addresses are always a multiple of 4, hence end in ``00``, leaving the last 2 bits
available; while on a 64-bit architecture, a word is 64 bits word = 8 bytes, so
word-aligned addresses end in ``000``, leaving the last 3 bits available.

The CPython GC makes use of two fat pointers:

* The ``_gc_prev``` field is normally used as the "previous" pointer to maintain the

>   doubly linked list but the lowest two bits of are used to keep some flags like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  doubly linked list but the lowest two bits of are used to keep flags
```

>   `PREV_MASK_COLLECTING` and `_PyGC_PREV_MASK_FINALIZED`. Between collections, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ``PREV_MASK_COLLECTING`` and ``_PyGC_PREV_MASK_FINALIZED``. Between collections, the
```

>   only flag that can be present is `_PyGC_PREV_MASK_FINALIZED` that indicates if an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  only flag that can be present is ``_PyGC_PREV_MASK_FINALIZED`` that indicates if an
```

>   object has been already finalized. During collections ``_gc_prev`` is temporary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  object has been already finalized. During collections ``_gc_prev`` is temporarily
```

>   used for storing the temporary copy of the reference count (``gc_refs``), and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  used for storing the temporary copy of the reference count (``gc_refs``), in
  addition to two flags, and the
```

count field can be examined using the ``sys.getrefcount`` function (notice that the
value returned by this function is always 1 more as the function also has a reference
to the object when called):

.. code-block:: python

    >>> x = object()
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    2
    >>> y = x
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    3
    del y
    >>> sys.getrefcount(x)
    2

The main problem with the reference count schema is that reference counting
does not handle reference cycles. For instance, consider this code:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> container = []
    >>> container.append(container)
    >>> sys.getrefcount(container)
    3
    >>> del container

In this example, ``container`` holds a reference to itself, so even when we remove
our reference to it (the variable "container") the reference count never falls to 0
because it still has its own internal reference and therefore it will never be
cleaned just by simple reference counting. For this reason some additional machinery
is needed to clean these reference cycles between objects once they become
unreachable. We normally refer to this additional machinery as the Garbage Collector,

> but technically reference counting is also a form of garbage collection.

Reviewer 4: Comments in the code use "cyclic GC" (and variations of that). Can we use that term when we need to contrast "the GC" with refcounting? For example:
```
... For this reason some additional machinery
is needed to clean these reference cycles between objects once they become
unreachable. This is the cyclic garbage collector, usually called just
Garbage Collector (GC), even though reference counting is also a form
of garbage collection.
```

Author: Thanks! Done in 4321593

                  +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+ /
                  |                      ...                      |
                  

In this way the object can be treated as a normal python object and when the extra
information associated to the GC is needed the previous fields can be accessed by a
simple type cast from the original object: :code:`((PyGC_Head *)(the_object)-1)`.

As is explained later in the `Optimization: reusing fields to save memory`_ section,
these two extra fields are normally used to keep doubly linked lists of all the
objects tracked by the garbage collector (these lists are the GC generations, more on
that in the `Optimization: generations`_ section), but they are also
reused to fullfill other pourposes when the full doubly linked list structure is not
needed as a memory optimization.

Doubly linked lists are used because they efficiently support most frequently required operations.  In
general, the collection of all objects tracked by GC are partitioned into disjoint sets, each in its own
doubly linked list.  Between collections, objects are partitioned into "generations", reflecting how

> often they're survived collection attempts.  During collections, the generations(s) being collected

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
often they've survived collection attempts.  During collections, the generations(s) being collected
```

Apart from this object structure, the type object for objects supporting garbage
collection must include the ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_GC`` in its ``tp_flags`` slot and
provide an implementation of the ``tp_traverse`` handler. Unless it can be proven
that the objects cannot form reference cycles with only objects of its type or if the
type is immutable, a ``tp_clear`` implementation must also be provided.

Identifiying reference cycles
----------------------------------------------

The algorithm that CPython uses to detect those reference cycles is
implemented in the ``gc`` module. The garbage collector **only focuses**
on cleaning container objects (i.e. objects that can contain a reference
to one or more objects). These can be arrays, dictionaries, lists, custom
class instances, classes in extension modules, etc. One could think that
cycles are uncommon but the truth is that many internal references needed by
the interpreter create cycles everywhere. Some notable examples:

    * Exceptions contain traceback objects that contain a list of frames that
      contain the exception itself.
    * Module-level functions reference the module's dict (which is needed to resolve globals),

>       which in turn contains an entry for the module-level function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      which in turn contains entries for the module-level functions.
```
